well 200 Israeli Ultra nationalists will
March through the old city in the
Western Wall in occupied East Jerusalem
they demand an end to the control of the
alaka mosque compound by The wakf
Authority that's the Islamic endownment
Authority which administers the Muslim
holy site well the alaka MOs compound is
a constant point of contention in the
Palestinian Israeli conflict Israel's
encroachments intensified in
1967 resulting in the illegal occupation
of the West Bank and East Jerusalem
including the old city and aluxa mosque
since 1967 Jordan and Israel agreed that
the wak or Islamic trust would have
control over matters inside the compound
while Israel would extend will control
rather external security non-muslims
would be allowed onto the site during
visiting hours but not allowed to pray
there Rising Temple movements have been
challenging the Israeli governments ban
on Jews entering the compound well today
Israeli forces routinely allow groups of
Jewish settlers to enter the alaka
compound under police and army
protection Israel restricts Palestinian
entry into the compound through several
methods including a separation war and
permits from Israeli authorities and
permits rather from Israeli authorities
are hard to
get I'm now joined by Mustafa abuu
Islamic scholar and member of the
Islamic W Council in occupied East
Jerusalem good to have you with us so
looking at what is transpiring are you
worried that the bigger picture is an
attempt to end your authorities
administration of the Muslim Moss
compound of course I'm U worried and in
fact everyone uh would be worried uh
because we talk about the rise of these
U you know fanatical uh Jewish movements
uh they have been on The Fringe decades
ago and today they have gained momentum
and they are they have representatives
in the Israeli KES the Israeli
Parliament and in the uh cabinet in the
Israeli uh Ministry Ministries so uh
this does worry us and uh of course it
is condemned
it is provocative and it has been
condemned by the Jordanian Ministry of
Foreign Affairs the official
spokesperson Dr
safyan warned against such a a pro
provocative March which would go through
the Muslim quarter of the whole city
through nablas the Damascus gate as we
call it and then through the most
probably the W Street and probably also
there would there is a small alley that
leads next to the uh W Administration
and then they will proceed uh to the
uh and but they would stop from uh
entering uh this uh this March has been
uh given the green light by the Israel
police but it means that this is the
office of the Israeli Prime Minister we
we know very well that anything pertains
to would have to get the direct okay
from uh prime minister Netanyahu himself
uh of course the gravity of the
situation made people
like y Le the leader of the Israeli
opposition to condemn also the same
March and he said that in during his
days he would not have had given such a
a group of Fanatics the uh the green
light
Theos in all of the the 144 denoms 36
acres plus uh is an Islamic holy size
and uh it is exclusively the right of
the W Department to administrative this
exclusive right exclusive legal and
historical uh right at is as this is the
historical status quo and just to put
this in context
because this The Narrative sometimes put
out by some of these far right Israeli
groups is that they want freedom of
worship equality of worship the ability
to Worship in this site however the the
backdrop explain to us the backdrop of
this because we know that some of these
far right Israeli Jewish groups promote
the idea of the complete destruction of
the alaka MOs compound some of them call
for the Ala Moss to be disassembled and
reassembled in in Mecca and other places
places right so this is this is for not
just a question of who's allowed to pray
where this is a struggle for sovereignty
and control
right this is true I mean this this
particular March they have raised the uh
uh the the stakes and they they are
demanding the total removal of the uh W
Administration and they want to
implement the total Israeli sovereignty
let's not forget that this is part as
you said said in your introduction that
this is part of East Jerusalem occupied
East Jerusalem and Israel as the
occupying uh Power has the uh
responsibility to uh uh maintain the
historical status quo until basically
the uh the end of uh the occupation yes
these uh groups uh demand uh U taking
over the Ala MOS those who are kind
enough they would like to re relocate
the D of the rock for example and there
are those politicians even who speak
directly about demolishing the uh the
Dome of the Rock and lately even amid
Hali a member of the keset
suggested that he would make it a law to
divide ala mosque whereby the Jews would
take about 2third including the Dome of
the Rock and the Northern Area and he
would leave the MOs the southern M
building in the hands of the uh Muslims
yes it's a how disturbing is it now when
we have I mean these sorts of calls and
ideas are very it's very difficult to
dismiss them as a fringe opinion anymore
when you see that members of the cabinet
the like the national security minister
itamar Ben gavier taking part in marches
to the alaa Moss compound um earlier
this year in July 2023 and on the record
are saying statements like this place is
important to us we have have to return
to it and prove our
sovereignty this place has been a most
for 1500 years and there is nothing that
could change this the
MOs and all its cour yards buildings uh
Subterranean Halls the it is airspace
even all of this belongs to the Muslims
sovereignty talk about political
sovereignty it should be Palestinian the
custodianship his majesty King ABD
second is the custodian of the Christian
and Muslim holy places this is accepted
by the American
Administration uh secretary blinkin used
you know the the same uh the same phrase
to describe the Jordan custodianship
It's A Century Of Care Jordanian care of
the Haram Sharif and yes it does pose uh
a risk it does pose a challenge uh but
we know very well that whether it's the
UNESCO it's the whether it's the
International
Community uh or locally the W tries its
best to uh protect the uh premises OFA
mosque these uh these movements whether
it's Bing he has this is really uh his
time but it's basically we know very
well um and hopefully that he will not
be in the next uh uh cabinet not that
this is the uh the maximum hopes for us
it's occupied land and it should be free
not freedom of movement not freedom of
worship for them freedom of movement for
us and freedom of worship for us since
October 7 the Israeli authorities
limited the uh the number and in fact
Muslims who could basically go TOA
more right are able to make it through
we'll have to leave it there Mustafa
thank you so much
thank you